Vinyl Thianthrenium Tetrafluoroborate: A Practical and Versatile Vinylating Reagent Made from Ethylene  

Fabio Juliá, Jiyao Yan, Fritz Paulus, and Tobias Ritter  

Owing to the rich chemistry of alkenes, the presence of a terminal alkenyl (vinyl, C2H3) substituent enables a myriad of opportunities for diversification and elaboration via dihydroxylation, carbofunctionalization, Heck-type arylation, hydroamination, and metathesis, among others.1−6 However, the introduction of a vinyl group as a C-2 building block is currently difficult, in contrast to the extended use of other substituted alkenyl electrophiles, in view of the lack of suitable reagents with the desired properties and reactivity profile. Here we report the reagent vinyl thianthrenium tetrafluoroborate (vinyl-TT+, 1) that functions as a versatile reagent for different synthetic transformations. Reagent 1 is accessible directly from ethylene (1 atm) in a single step from commercially available material on multigram scale and is a bench-stable, nonhygroscopic solid that can be stored at room temperature in air without signs of decomposition for at least one year. Despite its high stability, 1 displays a rich reactivity profile and has been implemented in several polar and palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, which differentiates it from all other vinylating reagents reported to date. The unusual direct conversion of ethylene into a versatile building block for organic synthesis sets the approach apart from previous syntheses of alkenylsulfonium salts; in addition, 1 can participate in useful reactions such as a Suzuki cross-coupling that have not been realized with other alkenylthianthrenium salts. 

Ethylene is an inexpensive gas (annual production >100 million tons),7 but its use in organic synthesis is rare and typically limited to simple substrates without high levels of complexity.8 One of the main drawbacks of the use of ethylene is the high temperature and pressures that are generally required for its conversion. In fact, reactions engaging ethylene at atmospheric pressure (1 atm) are uncommon and almost exclusive to metal-mediated reactions, owing to the ability of metal centers to activate ethylene via coordination.9−14 Metalfree reactions utilizing ethylene at 1 atm are manily restricted to photochemical cycloadditions with high-energy UV light.15−17 

Overall, the general requirement for specialized equipment (high-pressure reactors or UV-photoreactors) has traditionally restricted the use of ethylene as a reagent in organic synthesis involving complex small molecules. The development of palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions has allowed researchers to reliably construct C− Csp2 bonds (Figure 1A).18,19 However, in contrast to the widespread use of alkenyl (substituted vinyl) derivatives, the use of vinyl halides as electrophiles (e.g., vinyl bromide) is challenging owing to the difficulty of handling the gaseous compounds that are acutely toxic and carcinogenic, which has historically thwarted their utilization in synthesis.20 Alternatively, numerous nucleophilic vinyl-[M] reagents ([M] = SnBu3, SiMe3, B(OR)2, etc.) have been developed over the years,21 but most of them are prepared in several steps from vinyl bromide itself, display high toxicity and low stability, or are poorly reactive (Figure 1B). Moreover, while significant advances have been accomplished with vinyl nucleophiles, the development of electrophilic derivatives that can effectively display the reactivity profile of vinyl halides is significantly less accomplished, and none of them are suitable as Michael acceptors for the direct polar addition of nucleophiles. 
Jimenez,22 Mukaiyama,23 and Aggarwal24 have developed the use of vinyl diphenylsulfonium salts25 as a 1,2-ethane dication synthon. This hygroscopic oil, prepared in three steps from bromoethanol, displays some practicality issues26 and is often generated in situ from its precursor bromoethyl diphenylsulfonium triflate.27 Over the past two decades, Aggarwal and others have reported a series of elegant transformations applying this reagent to the synthesis of (hetero)cycles.24,28−34 However, neither the reagent nor its precursors have ever been reported as suitable electrophiles in cross-coupling reactions owing to their fundamental reactivity profile (vide infra). In fact, only a few substituted alkenyl sulfonium salts have been successfully engaged in cross-couplings,35−37 but no examples of vinylations have been reported. 
Our group recently reported the synthesis of alkenyl thianthrenium salts,38 but a general reactivity profile in polar and cross-couling reactions has not been explored yet. Moreover, we were unsuccessful in engaging these salts in efficient couplings with aryl boronic acids via Suzuki-type reactions. We recently aimed to design a strategy to trap ethylene efficiently and convert it into a practical and crystalline reagent (Figure 1C). Ideally, this new species should be stable and easy to handle, while simultaneously exhibiting a rich reactivity profile. We questioned whether vinyl thianthrenium salts (vinyl-TT+) could provide a valuable solution to this task. The perchlorate salt of vinyl-TT+ was published three decades ago while exploring the reactivity of thianthene radical cation (TT•+) with (vinyl)4Sn,39 but only milligram quantities were accessed owing to the involvement of potentially explosive perchlorate salts,40 and its synthetic use has never been reported. While, in comparison with other olefins, ethylene gas typically requires high pressure and an autoclave for cycloaddition reactions,8,41 we sought to capitalize on the high reactivity of the highly electrophilic thianthrenium dication species generated by treatment of thianthrene-S-oxide (2) with activating reagents such as Tf2O (Figure 2A). Following our new protocol, vinyl thianthrenium tetrafluoroborate (1) can now be prepared on multigram scale (50 mmol) with a simple balloon of ethylene (1 atm) in 86% yield. 
The isolation of 1 as a crystalline solid can be carried out by simple precipitation, to afford an analytically pure compound without the need for further purification. An alternative lab-scale synthetic route from vinyl-SiMe3 (2 equiv) was similarly effective (96% yield, see Supporting Information). The salt 1 is a nonhygroscopic solid that can be stored in the presence of air and moisture without signs of decomposition for at least one year, which makes it practical and easy-to-handle. DSC-TGA reveals that 1 does not decompose at temperatures lower than 280 °C, which underscores a desirable safety profile (Figure S6). In contrast, attempts of implementing this protocol using other sulfoxides such as dibenzothiophene-S-oxide or diphenylsulfoxide were unsuccessful (Figures S7 and S8). The structural features of thianthrene that allow the formation of a [4 + 2] adduct with ethylene seem crucial for a productive reaction, and indeed has enabled the first report on the formation of sulfonium salts directly from ethylene gas. To further confirm the key role of the [4 + 2] cycloadduct under the reaction conditions, we isolated and characterized intermediate 3, the crystal structure of which shows the “snapshot” of ethylene activation by the formal thianthrenium dication (Figure 2B). 
No other known vinylating reagent can currently be accessed directly from ethylene, and the practical and conceptual advantages of 1 allow a rich and divergent chemistry (see below) while avoiding certain limitations associated with other reagents. To evaluate the reactivity profile of 1 we started benchmarking the reagent in annulation reactions reported for vinyl-SPh2(OTf) or its precursor, which proceed via sulfonium ylide intermediates.25 As depicted in Figure 3, we can access (hetero)cyclic motifs that are prevalent in bioactive compounds and pharmaceuticals. Selected examples include a cyclopropanation reaction (4 → 5),28 the assembly of morpholine (6 → 7)24 and azetidine (8 → 9)31 scaffolds, and a tandem N-nucleophilic addition/Corey−Chaykovsky epoxidation (10 → 11).32 In all cases, the isolated yields were comparable or superior to those obtained with vinyl- SPh2(OTf) under the same conditions.   
